[WIP] MSCXXXX: `matrix.to` URI syntax v2 (#2644)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/2644-matrix.to-v2.md

| room ID | `!somewhere:example.org` | `!somewhere%3Aexample.org` |
| room alias | `#somewhere:example.org` | `%23somewhere%3Aexample.org` |
| user ID | `@alice:example.org` | `%40alice%3Aexample.org` |
| group ID | `+example:example.org` | `%2Bexample%3Aexample.org` |

The `extra parameter` (optional) is only used in the case of permalinks where an
event ID is referenced:

| type | literal value | encoded value |
| ---- | ------------- | ------------- |
| event ID | `$event:example.org` | `%24event%3Aexample.org` |

The ``<additional arguments>`` and the preceding question mark are optional and
only apply in certain circumstances:

* `via=<server>`
  * One or more servers [should be
    specified](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#routing) in the format
    `example.org` when linking to a room (including a permalink to an event in a
    room) since room IDs are not currently routable

If multiple ``<additional arguments>`` are present, they should be joined by `&`
characters, as in `https://matrix.to/!somewhere%3Aexample.org?via=example.org&via=alt.example.org`

The components of the matrix.to URI (``<identifier>`` and ``<extra parameter>``)

> are to be percent-encoded as per RFC 3986.

Reviewer: I agree with this. Having to only percent-encode delimiters when necessary, but accepting both makes it much easier to write matrix.to links by hand as well as generate them programmatically. Also, sparing only ! is super weird, but the current spec does that a lot, where only some things get encoded. It may make sense to say `/`, `?` and `#` must always be encoded to accommodate webclients, but anything else should also be accepted unencoded imo.

> are to be percent-encoded as per RFC 3986.

Author: There seems to be general agreement here and in the spec room that it would be better to focus on the unencoded form as the canonical syntax, and then note that they _can_ be encoded and will be accepted in that form as well by clients and the matrix.to site itself.

> are to be percent-encoded as per RFC 3986.

Author: To give a bit more detail, the encoding rules in this MSC at the moment are simply copied from the [current spec text](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#matrix-to-navigation): it encodes `#`, `+`, `$`, but does not encode `!`. (Originally I just assumed that encoding did indeed match the RFC as well, since spec text says it should.)

Anyway, I plan to change all the identifiers to be unencoded, since that is what's in common use, and obviously nicer for humans to read.

> are to be percent-encoded as per RFC 3986.

Author: I have updated the MSC to generally not percent-encode, aside from the new `client` argument, which itself contains a URL, so needs some encoding. For any new comments on the revised text, let's start a new thread.

in RFC 3986:

```
https://matrix.to/#/<identifier>/<extra parameter>?<additional arguments>
```

The `identifier` (required) may be a:

| type | literal value | encoded value |
| ---- | ------------- | ------------- |
| event ID | `$event:example.org` | `%24event%3Aexample.org` |
| room ID | `!somewhere:example.org` | `!somewhere%3Aexample.org` |
| room alias | `#somewhere:example.org` | `%23somewhere%3Aexample.org` |
| user ID | `@alice:example.org` | `%40alice%3Aexample.org` |
| group ID | `+example:example.org` | `%2Bexample%3Aexample.org` |

The `extra parameter` (optional) now only exists for compatibility with existing
v1 links. It can be used when `identifier` is a room ID or room alias as a part
of a permalink that references a specific event, as shown in the table below.
Going forward, this should be considered deprecated, and clients should place
only the event ID in the `identifier` position for new links.

| type | literal value | encoded value |
| ---- | ------------- | ------------- |
| event ID | `$event:example.org` | `%24event%3Aexample.org` |

Since clients currently cannot find a room from the event ID alone, a new

> client-server API is added to support the new format with only an event ID.

Reviewer 2: How would this work for v1 or v2 rooms where the Event ID is not based on a hash. Even if post-v3 world hash-event-ids could clash. https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v3#event-ids

Reviewer 3: The endpoint already exists, but is deprecated: https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#deprecated-get-matrix-client-r0-events-eventid

It was presumably deprecated for a reason though

Author: Ah yes, sorry I meant to state that only v3 room and later event IDs can be used in this way. I'll update the text to reflect that.

Reviewer 2: Arguably it should be v4 to be url-safe: https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v4

Reviewer 4: URL safety is a thing that's supposed to be in the existing spec, but none of the clients (literally none) handle it correctly.

Author: About event IDs clashing, if that ends up happening, I assume that would be a much larger problem for other parts of the system as well, so I don't think it requires special consideration (like carrying around a room ID just in case) here...?

Reviewer 4: Yesterday I found out synapse has a UNIQUE constraint on the event ID in various tables (like `events`), so it shouldn't happen that often.

Author: It's not clear to me that we _must_ settle whether event IDs are unique for the scope of this MSC though. The meaning of an event ID by itself as proposed here seems clear enough: a client take that event ID and map to a room using the TBD API. For room versions where the event IDs are not globally unique, you'll probably get some very strange answers back, but the description of the event to room mapping API could explain that uniqueness depends on room versions.

Reviewer 5: Well, you can say that trying to resolve a bare event URL in the presence of room versions that don't guarantee event id uniqueness leads to [undefined behaviour](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Undefined_behavior); however, since this is exactly the situation in the current federation due to v1 and v2 rooms, such disclaimer basically says that practically _any_ attempt to resolve a bare event id is not guaranteed to return a non-conflicting result. The main issue here is: before resolving the event id you have no idea about the version of its room; so you cannot rely on any invariants specific to certain room versions.

Reviewer 4: > Ah yes, sorry I meant to state that only v3 room and later event IDs can be used in this way. I'll update the text to reflect that.

Is it possible to have this happen? We probably shouldn't call out specific versions (to account for future mistakes), and could easily say something like "matrix.to URIs using a bare event ID should never be generated when the global uniqueness of the event cannot be guaranteed, such as in the case of v1 and v2 rooms."

Author: I have updated the text to state event IDs alone should only be used when global uniqueness can be guaranteed, as @turt2live suggests, which I believe resolves the core concern of this thread. Let's start a new thread if there are other details remaining here.

Reviewer 6: There's also discussion on this here: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2695#discussion_r459641368

> > TODO: To support this, a new client-server API will be defined which

Author: This is the main reason I have marked this WIP for now, so please let me know how best to proceed for this portion.

Reviewer 4: oh, hmm, if this is the only reason then it might be best to stick it in the general not-WIP queue for more eyes.

So far our answer to scope creep like this is to prefer a new MSC.

Author: Okay, will remove the WIP label then.

> allows clients to query the mapping from event ID to room ID. I'd like

> > feedback on whether to define such a thing here, or in a separate MSC.

Author: Agreed this should happen separately, updated the text for now to state that.

The ``<additional arguments>`` and the preceding question mark are optional and
only apply in certain circumstances:

* `via=<server>`
  * One or more servers [should be
    specified](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#routing) in the format
    `example.org` when linking to a room (including a permalink to an event in a
    room) since room IDs are not currently routable
* `client=<client URL>`
  * This parameter allows clients to indicate which client shared the URI
  * Clients should identify themselves via a schemeless `https` URL pointing
      to a download / install page, such as:
    * `foo.com`
    * `apps.apple.com/app/foo/id1234`
    * `play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.foo.client`
* `federated=false`

>   * This parameter allows indicating whether a room exists on a federating
>     server (assumed to be the default), or if the client must connect via the
>     server identified by the room ID or event ID (when set to `false`)

Reviewer 5: By the definition of federation, you cannot rely on federating servers to identify a server of a room/event residing outside of federation. Seems that `federated=false` implies using `via=<non-federating server>` except quite specific situations. The next issue is with the requirement to connect via that server: worded in almost the same way in #2312, this approach [faced controversy](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2312#discussion_r348960282). To alleviate that, I propose the following: 
```suggestion
    server (assumed to be the default), or if the room/event is only reachable
    through a specific server (when set to `false`). This server is usually
    specified in a `via` parameter, unless the target client is expected to
    be able to unambiguously resolve it.
```

Author: Hmm, why would the `federated=false` case include `via=<non-federating server>`? I had been assuming for the non-federated case, the client effectively must connect to the only server that knows about the room, which is already present in the room ID, so there's not much purpose to including `via` as well for such a case. Is "unless the target client is expected to be able to unambiguously resolve it" trying to allow for this somehow...? It's vague enough that I am not sure what it really means... 😅 

The goal I see with `federated=false` is it allows the client to know for certain that it must connect via an account on the only server that knows about that room, rather than attempting to do so using `via` params that will not work from a federating account on some different server than the room.

Reviewer 5: Because a client can be exposed to more than one Matrix network? Actually, it just occurred to me that `federated=false` is not quite a good name for that reason. If you have one public federation and one closed federation (for testing, e.g.) then you actually have two federations, not one federation and an unfederated server :-\

And continuing to the point about using room IDs to find an unfederated server - with certain confidence this works if you have a single entirely unfederated server _and_ it has never federated. But IIRC, Synapse already adds the server signified in the room id to the list of "via" servers, and we even have this behaviour specced somewhere - so probably `federated=false` is just extraneous then?

The "able to unambiguously resolve" piece is, yes, an attempt to describe the situation when the link is shared with someone who _most definitely_ will use it at the correct server. Feel free to rephrase :-D

> * `sharer=<MXID>`

Author: The reason for an MXID in particular is it would allow matrix.to to request profile info (avatar, display name) for the sharer and display that (assuming the user consents to such requests at all). I'll fold this extra info into the text.

`Origin` seems a bit technical and hides that it's a person who shared a thing, so I'm inclined to leave the name as-is. I also worry it would be easily confused with the various servers and vias flying around in the syntax.

> * `sharer=<MXID>`

Author: Added explanation for MXID to the text, hopefully that clarifies.

> * `sharer=<MXID>`

Reviewer 5: Well, I still wouldn't mind to have the same feature for non-Matrix sharers but if we want to make some kind of experience barrier between Matrix and non-Matrix then so be it.

> * `sharer=<MXID>`

Author: Ah, I see what you mean... One possibility is to allow it to be more free form and generic, but also suggest MXIDs as the thing to put here if you have one. I'm curious what others thinks about this as well.

  * This parameter allows indicating the MXID of the account which created the
    link, so that clients and interstitial UIs can display more context to the
    user

If multiple ``<additional arguments>`` are present, they should be joined by `&`
characters, as in `https://matrix.to/!somewhere%3Aexample.org?via=example.org&via=alt.example.org`

The components of the matrix.to URI (``<identifier>`` and ``<extra parameter>``)

> are to be percent-encoded as per RFC 3986.

Reviewer 5: See my comment above, except that the proposed `client` parameter has an embedded URL in it which may include queries and even fragments; so it becomes pretty important to clearly delineate which delimiters are encoded (at least those in the client URL, obviously) and which are not (`?` and `/` outside of the URL? then we're insisting on non-compliance with RFC3986; or, if we encode them outside the URL then `?` and `/` inside the client URL should be double-encoded - `%253F` and `%252F`, respectively?).

In other words - we've allowed some mess with non-encoding things for the sake of matrix.to usability, we now have to decide if we want to continue allowing it (with the risk of problems in apps unaware of our quirks, and client developers getting lost in the meaning of a particular character in a particular position when dealing with matrix.to URLs) or we want to get stricter (at the expense of reduced usability for humans who construct matrix.to URLs themselves).

Author: I have updated the MSC to generally not percent-encode, aside from the new `client` argument, which itself contains a URL, so needs some encoding. For any new comments on the revised text, let's start a new thread.

Examples of matrix.to URIs using the revised syntax are:

* Room alias: ``https://matrix.to/#/%23somewhere%3Aexample.org``
* Room alias with client and sharer:

>   ``https://matrix.to/#/%23somewhere%3Aexample.org?client=foo.com&sharer=%40alice%3Aexample.org``

Reviewer 5: Can we give a bit less simplistic example for the client URL here? Say, if the download URL is `https://example.org/releases?download#latest`:
```suggestion
  ``https://matrix.to/#/%23somewhere%3Aexample.org?client=example.org%2Freleases%3Fdownload%23latest&sharer=%40alice%3Aexample.org``
```

> * Room: ``https://matrix.to/#/!somewhere%3Aexample.org?via=example.org&via=alt.example.org``

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Room: ``https://matrix.to/#/%21somewhere%3Aexample.org?via=example.org&via=alt.example.org``
```
Or become consistent on what we do with sigils and colons inside Matrix ids: either we encode them all, or we only encode `#` because the RFC doesn't allow to leave it unencoded.

Author: I have updated the MSC to generally not percent-encode, aside from the new `client` argument, which itself contains a URL, so needs some encoding. For any new comments on the revised text, let's start a new thread.

* Event permalink: ``https://matrix.to/#/%24event%3Aexample.org?via=example.org&via=alt.example.org``
* User: ``https://matrix.to/#/%40alice%3Aexample.org``
* Group: ``https://matrix.to/#/%2Bexample%3Aexample.org``

### Summary of changes

* When permalinking to a specific event, the room ID is no longer required and
  event IDs are now permitted in the identifier position, so URIs like

>   `https://matrix.to/#/%24event%3Aexample.org` are now acceptable

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  `https://matrix.to/#/%24EventIdAsUnpaddedBase64` are now acceptable
```

Author: Thanks, I have updated to use v4+ style event IDs by default.

* Clients should prefer creating URIs with room aliases instead of room IDs

>   where possible, as it's more human-friendly and `via` params are not needed

Reviewer 5: That recommendation doesn't match the feature you introduced just before. First, the recommendation itself is, unfortunately, not universal - see https://github.com/vector-im/riot-web/issues/2925 for details. Second, if you link to an event with `$`, a random federating server is unlikely to find its room if it doesn't already know that room; so you'll have to pass `via` in the same way you do it for room ids. I'd probably just drop this recommendation because it's outside of this MSC's scope.

* A new, optional `client` parameter allows clients to indicate
  which client shared the URI
* A new, optional `federated` parameter allows indicating whether a room exists

>   on a federating server (assumed to be the default), or if the client must
>   connect via the server identified by the room ID or event ID (when set to
>   `false`)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  on a federating server (assumed to be the default), or if it's only
  reachable through/at a certain server
```

* A new, optional `sharer` parameter allows indicating the MXID of the account
  which created the link, in case that is meaningful to include

## Potential issues

This proposal seeks to extend the existing `matrix.to` syntax, but there is also
an open proposal for a [Matrix URI
scheme](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2312). If this proposal
moves forward, the Matrix URI scheme would likely need to be reworked to
accommodate the additions here.

The new `client` parameter implies there are potentially many identifiers that
might be passed that point to a given client. If there are use cases which rely
on a static mapping of client identifier to client name, logo, etc. for some
reason, then that could become a burden to maintain over time. The flexibility
of accepting any URL as an identifier (and thus avoiding the need to register a
client in a centralised place) seems preferable and hopefully outweighs this

> concern.

Reviewer 5: Maybe using a rev-DNS naming as practised in many other areas throughout Matrix would still be better. With the level of maturity across the ecosystem, clients' download locations change frequently enough to become stale in permalinks.

A bigger issue though is that `client` and `sharer` set an unusual (and questionable) precedent where a Uniform Resource Locator describes not only the target location but also the locator's author. If uncontrolled, it can be a means for massive leaking of data people probably didn't want to share - specifically the connectivity of people across the social graph (imagine a reaction upon receiving a link with the _original_ sharer because the next sharer didn't care to update it: "wait, where does he know _this_ sharer from?"). And rewriting the sharing source every time the link is re-shared is really tedious; as soon as the link is copied as plain text, you can _assume_ rewriting _won't_ happen by default.

## Alternatives

Instead of extending `matrix.to`, these embellishments could wait for and
extend the future [Matrix URI
scheme](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2312). This proposal
attempts to be pragmatic and tries to extend what is already in use today,
rather than blocking on a new scheme.

## Security considerations

The new `sharer` parameter is not authenticated, so you could make it appear as
if someone had shared something they did not. It is currently assumed that this

> is a minor concern.

Reviewer 5: Right, you can (at least in theory) distrust `sharer` but, as mentioned above, you cannot "be forced to forget" if you received a certain `sharer` string. If this piece of information leaked, it's leaked.

# MSC2644: `matrix.to` URI syntax v2

`matrix.to` URIs are used frequently to link to Matrix things (events, rooms,
users, groups) in the ecosystem today. By adjusting and extending them a bit
further, both clients and the interstitial screens hosted at `matrix.to` can

> give the user more context and a better experience.

Reviewer 4: it would be good to acknowledge and re-affirm the spec by saying that the web service is not guaranteed to exist, work, etc. Most of these changes are to better support that interface, however the client benefits of being able to iterate on their own consumption of these links shouldn't be missed.

Author: Okay, I have added a bit more text on this.

| group ID | `+example:example.org` | `%2Bexample%3Aexample.org` |

The `extra parameter` (optional) now only exists for compatibility with existing
v1 links. It can be used when `identifier` is a room ID or room alias as a part
of a permalink that references a specific event, as shown in the table below.
Going forward, this should be considered deprecated, and clients should place
only the event ID in the `identifier` position for new links.

| type | literal value | encoded value |
| ---- | ------------- | ------------- |
| event ID | `$event:example.org` | `%24event%3Aexample.org` |

Since clients currently cannot find a room from the event ID alone, a new
client-server API is added to support the new format with only an event ID.

> TODO: To support this, a new client-server API will be defined which
> allows clients to query the mapping from event ID to room ID. This will be
> defined in a separate MSC.

The ``<additional arguments>`` and the preceding question mark are optional and
only apply in certain circumstances:

* `via=<server>`
  * One or more servers [should be
    specified](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#routing) in the format

>     `example.org` when linking to a room or an event since room IDs are
>     not currently routable

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    `example.org` when linking to a room or an event since room IDs and event
    IDs are not currently routable on their own
```

* `client=<client URL>`

>   * This parameter allows clients to indicate which client shared the URI

Reviewer 4: would be good to spell out that this also gives users the option of downloading the client, particularly for use in the matrix.to fallback page (which is specifically specced to not exist, ironically).

  * Clients should identify themselves via a schemeless `https` URL pointing
      to a download / install page, such as:
    * `foo.com`
    * `apps.apple.com/app/foo/id1234`

>     * `play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.foo.client`

Reviewer 2: M suggested that matrix.to should scrape the Name & Icon from this to show to the user but play.google.com doesn't offer ACAO so wouldn't be possible without some server-side service.

> * `federated=false`

Reviewer 4: Why do we need this? `via` indeed appears to communicate the intent, and if a client is using Matrix in a private environment it is going to be better off inventing its own permalink structure (for in-app linking rather than trying to tame matrix.to)

Author: The goal I see with `federated=false` is it allows the client to know for certain that it must connect via an account on the only server that knows about that room, rather than attempting to do so using via params that will not work from a federating account on some different server than the room.

Reviewer 4: From a spec perspective I'm not sure we care about that. If the user received a link, they have a reasonable shot of going through to the content.

Reviewer 5: The author of the link may or may not supply `via` parts as necessary, basing on how the room is supposed to be reached. Since unfederated rooms by definition can only have unfederated accounts, the `via` list will contain exactly one entry - the unfederated server (if [the current algorithm](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#routing) of constructing it is followed).

  * This parameter allows indicating whether a room exists on a federating
    server (assumed to be the default), or if the client must connect via the
    server identified by the room ID or event ID (when set to `false`)

> * `sharer=<MXID>`

Reviewer 4: Do we have any abuse mitigation suggestions to provide to clients which handle matrix.to in-app (or to the matrix.to fallback page)? It's far too easy to manually craft this to use non-existent IDs which will easily get clients to show in giant header text the bare mxid. Or worse, a real mxid with all kinds of abuse being included in the profile response.

Author: Hmm, I am not sure what we might offer in that regard... In seems like more of social problem to me, as in you should avoid clicking links from untrusted parties who might abuse things in this way. I can't think of technical solution, other than somehow signing the links, but that's quite heavy weight for this problem and aesthetically unsatisfying.

  * This parameter allows indicating the MXID of the account which created the
    link, so that clients and interstitial UIs can display more context to the
    user
  * As an example, clients and interstitial UIs could use this to query profile
    data for the sharer's account and display the sharer's avatar and display
    name

If multiple ``<additional arguments>`` are present, they should be joined by `&`

> characters, as in `https://matrix.to/!somewhere%3Aexample.org?via=example.org&via=alt.example.org`

Reviewer 4: Can we just say it's query string format under RFC whatever?

Reviewer 5: It would at least need the "as-if we were not inside the fragment already" caveat.

Author: The description of fragment in RFC 3986 seems quite lenient about which characters can be used. Why is caveat needed?

Author: I have at least added a mention of the RFC here.

The ``<additional arguments>`` and the preceding question mark are optional and
only apply in certain circumstances:

* `via=<server>`
  * One or more servers [should be
    specified](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#routing) in the format
    `example.org` when linking to a room (including a permalink to an event in a
    room) since room IDs and event IDs are not currently routable

If multiple ``<additional arguments>`` are present, they should be treated as
query params following RFC 3986 (even though they are in the fragment):
`https://matrix.to/#/!somewhere:example.org?via=example.org&via=alt.example.org`

While the spec says the components of the matrix.to URI (``<identifier>`` and
``<extra parameter>``) are to be percent-encoded as per RFC 3986, clients often
do not encode, and it is more human-friendly to leave them unencoded, so we
ignore the encoded version here.

### Revised syntax

A matrix.to URI has the following format, based upon the specification defined
in RFC 3986:

```
https://matrix.to/#/<identifier>/<extra parameter>?<additional arguments>
```

The `identifier` (required) may be a:

| type | value |
| ---- | ----- |

> | event ID (v1) | `$event:example.org` |

Reviewer 6: As event IDs should be per-room unique they shouldn't be able to be placed on their own in the URL, only in combination with a room ID.

Reviewer 6: While soru highly disagrees with the update, as then in the future the format will be that only in e.g. v3-v9 rooms the event ID should be alone, the discussion for that should be moved for consistency here: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2695#discussion_r459641368

Author: Thanks, I have revised the text as per an earlier thread here to say event IDs should only be used alone when uniqueness is assured.

Reviewer 6: Unfortunatley that means that in the future it may have to be updated that it only applies to e.g. room version 3-9 and then 12-14. This is a huge mess :/

Author: As you suggest, I think the thread on 2695 is indeed the better place to discuss and the global uniqueness issue.
